# pepkalc
Robust simulation software for the comprehensive evaluation of protein electrostatics in unfolded state.

## Protein electrostatics
Protonation is a ubiquitous and important process in biology. Protein folding, ligand recognition, enzyme catalysis, membrane potentials, and the energetics of cells depend on ionization and proton transfer. Charge-charge interactions are of special importance for Intrinsically Disordered Proteins, which are known to contain abnormally high numbers of consecutive charged amino acids. Consequently, a great theoretical effort has been devoted to elucidation of protein electrostatic interactions in unfolded state.

## The problem
Polypeptide sequence length is the single dominant factor hampering the effectiveness of currently available software tools for _de novo_ calculation of amino acid-specific protonation constants in disordered polypeptides.

## Our solution
**pepKalc** is robust simulation software for the comprehensive evaluation of protein electrostatics in unfolded state. Our software completely removes the limitations of the previously described Monte-Carlo approaches in the computation of protein electrostatics, by using a hybrid approach that effectively combines exact and mean-field calculations to rapidly obtain accurate results. Paired with a modern architecture CPUs, **pepKalc** is capable of evaluating protonation behavior for an arbitrary-size polypeptide in a sub-second time regime.

## Installation
Clone this repository,
```
git clone https://github.com/PeptoneInc/pepkalc.git
```
and install Python dependencies (you will need `pip` utility for that),
```
pip install scipy numpy
```

## Usage
Call **pepkalc** like any other Python script, parsing command-line paramters, e.g.
```
python pepkalc.py --sequence DDD
```
will perform pKa and Hill parameter estimations for `DDD` polypeptide. Amino acid titration curves will be generated by default in root directory `_titration.dat`. Total charge `Total_Q.dat` and pH dependence of folding stability `Total_G.dat` curves will be produced.

## Parameters
**pepkalc** accepts the following input parameters:

#### --help
Prints out help file in human readable format.

#### --sequence
One-letter amino acid sequence following FASTA convention. Please use `n` and `c` to include N- and C-Terminus in your calculations. Default value `nMDVFMKGLSKAKEGVVAAAEKTKQGVAEAAGKTKEGVLYVGSKTKEGVVHGVATVAEKTKEQVTNVGGAVVTGVTAVAQKTVEGAGSIAAATGFVKKDQLGKNEEGAPQEGILEDMPVDPDNEAYEMPSEEGYQDYEPEAc`.

#### --temperature
The temperature in `K`. Default value `283.15`.

#### --ionicstrength
The ionic strength in `M`. Default value `0.0`.

#### --epsilon
The dielectric permeability of solvent. Default value `83.83` (assuming aqueous solution).

#### --gca
Charge distance shift due to side chain. Default value `5.0`.

#### --gcb
The effective residue separation. Default value `7.5`.

#### --cutoff
The cutoff size for explicit interaction energy calculations. Default value `2`.  

#### --ncycles
The number of calculation super-cycles. Default value `3`.

#### --nooutput
Disable titration curve output. `_titration.dat` files will not be written.

#### --silent
Do not write diagnostic messages to Terminal.

## Issues
We are always looking forward to improving **pepkalc**.

Please file bug reports, issues or suggestions using https://github.com/PeptoneLtd/pepkalc/issues

Should you have questions related to scientific and industrial implications of **pepkalc**, please contact us at support@peptone.io.

## Acknowledgments
Authors thank Alison Lowndes and Carlo Ruiz, (NVIDIA Corporation) for facilitating collaboration and access to DGX-1 supercomputing node.

## References
**pepkalc** is based on ongoing scientific research of [Frans A.A. Mulder Laboratory at Aarhus University (Denmark)](http://inano.au.dk/about/research-groups/laboratory-for-biomolecular-nmr-spectroscopy/) and [Peptone - The Protein Intelligence Company](https://peptone.io) into protein electrostatics in unfolded state and development of numerical methods for biophysical characterization of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins.

Please cite **pepkalc** as:

pepKalc - scalable and comprehensive calculation of electrostatic interactions in random coil polypeptides. Tamiola K., Scheek R.M., van der Meulen P., and Mulder F.A.A. Bioinformatics 2017 (Submitted).
